docs/usage/post-install.md, before:

# Post-Installation Guide

Welcome to your new tuinix system! This guide covers what to expect after your first boot.

## First boot

After installation and reboot:

1. GRUB loads automatically
2. You'll be prompted for your ZFS encryption passphrase
3. The system boots to a terminal login prompt
4. Log in as `root` (with the password you set during installation)

## Your environment

tuinix is a terminal-only system. There is no desktop environment,
no window manager, and no graphical login screen. Everything is
done from the command line.

Your system includes:

- **Shell**: A modern shell with intelligent completions
- **Multiplexer**: Terminal multiplexer for managing multiple sessions
- **Editor**: Terminal-based text editors
- **File manager**: Terminal file browser
- **System monitoring**: Resource monitoring tools
- **Networking**: WiFi and ethernet management tools
- **Development**: Git and common development utilities

## System configuration

Your tuinix flake is a git repository cloned from upstream:

| Path | Purpose |
|------|---------|
| `/etc/tuinix` | System reference copy (read-only for non-root) |
| `~/tuinix` | Your git working copy with your host config committed |

The installer creates `~/tuinix` as a shallow clone of the upstream
tuinix repo with your host-specific configuration (`hosts/<hostname>/`)
grafted in and committed. This means you can pull upstream improvements
while keeping your local host customizations.

### Making changes

```bash
cd ~/tuinix
# Edit your host config in hosts/$(hostname)/
sudo nixos-rebuild switch --flake .#$(hostname)
# Commit your changes
git add -A && git commit -m "Describe your change"
```

### Pulling upstream updates

```bash
cd ~/tuinix
git pull --rebase
sudo nixos-rebuild switch --flake .#$(hostname)
```

### Rolling back

NixOS keeps previous system generations. To roll back:

```bash
# List available generations
sudo nix-env --list-generations -p /nix/var/nix/profiles/system

# Switch to a previous generation at next boot
sudo nixos-rebuild boot --flake .#$(hostname) --rollback
```

Or select a previous generation from the GRUB boot menu.

## Networking

### Ethernet

Wired connections should work automatically via DHCP.

### WiFi

```bash
# Scan for networks
nmcli device wifi list

# Connect to a network
nmcli device wifi connect "SSID" password "password"
```

## Updating the system

```bash
cd ~/tuinix
git pull --rebase        # Get upstream tuinix improvements
nix flake update         # Update nixpkgs and other flake inputs
sudo nixos-rebuild switch --flake .#$(hostname)
git add flake.lock && git commit -m "Update flake inputs"
```

For more on ZFS snapshots and pool management, see the [ZFS Management](zfs.md) guide.

Commit message:

Add user account setup to installer with git identity configuration
- Prompt for username, full name, and email during installation
- Generate dynamic users/<username>.nix with home-manager git config
- Configure git identity before committing to avoid "Author identity unknown" error
- Add Portuguese locale (pt_PT, pt_BR) and keyboard (pt, br) options
- Update post-install docs to reflect new user-based workflow
- Show login credentials in completion message

docs/usage/post-install.md, after:

# Post-Installation Guide

Welcome to your new tuinix system! This guide covers what to expect after your first boot.

## First boot

After installation and reboot:

1. GRUB loads automatically
2. You'll be prompted for your ZFS encryption passphrase
3. The system boots to a terminal login prompt
4. Log in with the username you created during installation (default password: `changeme`)
5. **Change your password immediately**: `passwd`

## Your environment

tuinix is a terminal-only system. There is no desktop environment,
no window manager, and no graphical login screen. Everything is
done from the command line.

Your system includes:

- **Shell**: A modern shell with intelligent completions
- **Multiplexer**: Terminal multiplexer for managing multiple sessions
- **Editor**: Terminal-based text editors
- **File manager**: Terminal file browser
- **System monitoring**: Resource monitoring tools
- **Networking**: WiFi and ethernet management tools
- **Development**: Git and common development utilities

## System configuration

Your tuinix flake is a git repository cloned from upstream:

| Path | Purpose |
|------|---------|
| `/etc/tuinix` | System reference copy (read-only for non-root) |
| `~/tuinix` | Your git working copy with your host config committed |

The installer creates `~/tuinix` as a shallow clone of the upstream
tuinix repo with your host-specific configuration (`hosts/<hostname>/`)
and user configuration (`users/<username>.nix`) grafted in and committed.
This means you can pull upstream improvements while keeping your local
host customizations.

Git is pre-configured with your name and email (as entered during installation),
so you can commit changes immediately without any additional setup.

### Making changes

```bash
cd ~/tuinix
# Edit your host config in hosts/$(hostname)/
sudo nixos-rebuild switch --flake .#$(hostname)
# Commit your changes
git add -A && git commit -m "Describe your change"
```

### Pulling upstream updates

```bash
cd ~/tuinix
git pull --rebase
sudo nixos-rebuild switch --flake .#$(hostname)
```

### Rolling back

NixOS keeps previous system generations. To roll back:

```bash
# List available generations
sudo nix-env --list-generations -p /nix/var/nix/profiles/system

# Switch to a previous generation at next boot
sudo nixos-rebuild boot --flake .#$(hostname) --rollback
```

Or select a previous generation from the GRUB boot menu.

## Networking

### Ethernet

Wired connections should work automatically via DHCP.

### WiFi

```bash
# Scan for networks
nmcli device wifi list

# Connect to a network
nmcli device wifi connect "SSID" password "password"
```

## Updating the system

```bash
cd ~/tuinix
git pull --rebase        # Get upstream tuinix improvements
nix flake update         # Update nixpkgs and other flake inputs
sudo nixos-rebuild switch --flake .#$(hostname)
git add flake.lock && git commit -m "Update flake inputs"
```

For more on ZFS snapshots and pool management, see the [ZFS Management](zfs.md) guide.
